v2 of XLS-68: Sponsored Fees and Reserves specification (#383)
XRPLF/XRPL-Standards: XLS-0068-sponsored-fees-and-reserves/README.md

- `Escrow`
- `Check`
- `PayChannel`
- `DepositPreauth`
- `Ticket`
- `NFTokenPage`
- `NFTokenOffer`
- `AMM`
- `Bridge`
- `XChainOwnedClaimID`
- `XChainOwnedCreateAccountClaimID`
- `DID`
- Any other ledger entry type that contributes to an account's owner reserve, subject to implementation details

The `Sponsor` field **must not** appear on:

- `RippleState` objects (they instead use the `HighSponsor` and `LowSponsor` fields defined in section 7.1)
- `DirectoryNode` objects (these do not have reserves)
- `Amendments` objects (global ledger objects)
- `FeeSettings` objects (global ledger objects)
- `NegativeUNL` objects (global ledger objects)

#### 4.2.2. Presence Rules

- The field **must** be omitted when there is no sponsor; there is no sentinel value such as `0` or an empty string to indicate "no sponsor".
- When present, the field **must** contain a valid `AccountID` that exists on the ledger.
- The field is added when sponsorship is established (either at object creation or via `SponsorshipTransfer`).
- The field is removed when sponsorship is dissolved via `SponsorshipTransfer`.

#### 4.2.3. Constraints

- **Self-Sponsorship**: An account **may not** sponsor its own objects.

> - **Relationship to Ownership**: The `Sponsor` value **must** differ from the object's owner (as indicated by the `Owner` or `Account` field).

Reviewer: These 2 lines are the same (154/155)

| `PreviousTxnID`     |           | ✔️        | N/A           | `string`  | `Hash256`     | The identifying hash of the transaction that most recently modified this entry.                                                                        |
| `PreviousTxnLgrSeq` |           | ✔️        | N/A           | `number`  | `UInt32`      | The ledger index that contains the transaction that most recently modified this object.                                                                |

### 5.3. Flags

There are two flags on this object:

| Flag Name                             | Flag Value   | Modifiable? | Description                                                                                                 |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------ | ----------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `lsfSponsorshipRequireSignForFee`     | `0x00010000` | Yes         | If set, indicates that every use of this sponsor for sponsoring fees requires a signature from the sponsor. |

> | `lsfSponsorshipRequireSignForReserve` | `0x00020000` | Yes         | If set, indicates that every use of this sponsor for sponsoring fees requires a signature from the sponsor. |

Author: That was also added here

### 5.4. Ownership

The object is owned by `Owner`, who also pays the reserve for this object.

### 5.5. Reserves

**Reserve Requirement:** Standard

The reserve is charged to the sponsor's account (the `Owner` field).

> ### 5.6. Deletion

Reviewer: No explanation how it should behave if sponsee  have sponsored ledger objects created through this Sponsorship ledger object

Author: There's a note further down

> #### 5.6.1. Deletion Transactions

Author: I don't follow

- The `tfDeleteObject` flag must be enabled.
- No other fields (`FeeAmount`, `MaxFee`, `ReserveCount`, or flag-setting fields) may be specified in the deletion transaction.
- **Note:** Non-zero `FeeAmount` and `ReserveCount` values **are** permitted at deletion time. Any remaining XRP in `FeeAmount` is returned to the sponsor's account upon deletion.

#### 5.6.3. Account Deletion Blocker

This object is a [deletion blocker](https://xrpl.org/docs/concepts/accounts/deleting-accounts/#requirements).

This object must be deleted before its owner account (the sponsor) can be deleted. The sponsor must either:

1. Delete the `Sponsorship` object via `SponsorshipSet` with `tfDeleteObject`, or
2. Wait for the sponsee to delete it (if the sponsee has permission to do so)

**Note on Existing Sponsored Objects:** Deleting a `Sponsorship` object **does not** affect already-sponsored ledger entries or accounts. Those existing sponsored objects/accounts will retain their `Sponsor` field and continue to be sponsored. To dissolve sponsorship for existing objects, the `SponsorshipTransfer` transaction must be used.

> ### 5.7. Invariants

Reviewer: Document is big, better to have at least a link to it

The following invariants must always hold for a `Sponsorship` object:

- `Owner != Sponsee` (an account cannot create a `Sponsorship` object with itself as both sponsor and sponsee)
- `FeeAmount >= 0` AND `FeeAmount` is denominated in XRP (drops)
- `ReserveCount >= 0`
- At least one of `FeeAmount` and `ReserveCount` must be included
- Both `Owner` and `Sponsee` must be valid `AccountID` values that exist on the ledger

### 5.8. RPC Name

The `snake_case` form of the ledger object name is `sponsorship`.

### 5.9. Example JSON

```json
{

>   "LedgerEntryType": "Sponsorship",

Reviewer: Should be low case **S**, no?

| `WalletSize`           |           |           | N/A           | `number`  | `UInt32`      | Unused.                                                                                                                                                               |

</details>

This spec proposes these additional fields:

| Field Name               | Constant? | Required? | Default Value | JSON Type | Internal Type | Description                                                                   |
| ------------------------ | --------- | --------- | ------------- | --------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Sponsor`                |           |           | N/A           | `string`  | `AccountID`   | The sponsor that is paying the account reserve for this account.              |
| `SponsoredOwnerCount`    |           |           | `0`           | `number`  | `UInt32`      | The number of objects the account owns that are being sponsored by a sponsor. |

> | `SponsoringOwnerCount`   |           |           | `0`           | `number`  | `UInt32`      | The number of objects the account is sponsoring the reserve for.              |

Reviewer: May be divide this table into 2 and indicating somehow that 2 upper fields are mutually exclusive with 2 lower fields?

- Alice signs and submits her transaction as normal.

_Note that Spencer does not need to be a part of Alice's signing and submission flow in this example._

### 3.4. Recouping a Sponsored Object Reserve

In this scenario, the sponsor, Spencer, would like to re-obtain the reserve that is currently trapped due to his sponsorship of Alice's object.

Spencer can submit a `SponsorshipTransfer` transaction, which allows him to pass the onus of the reserve back to Alice, or pass it onto another sponsor.

### 3.5. Recouping a Sponsored Account Reserve

In this scenario, the sponsor, Spencer, would like to retrieve his reserve from sponsoring Alice's account.

There are two ways in which he could do this:

- If Alice is done using her account, she can submit an `AccountDelete` transaction, which will send all remaining funds in the account back to Spencer.
- If Alice would like to keep using her account, or would like to switch to a different provider, she (or Spencer) can submit a `SponsorshipTransfer` transaction to either remove sponsorship or transfer it to the new provider.

> ## 4. Ledger Entries: Common Fields

Author: e70455e7c0600f05c8c2ee6793eb9222bbafb0ea (new section 4.2)

| `LedgerEntryType` | ✔️        | ✔️        | N/A           | `string`  | `UInt16`      | The type of ledger entry.               |
| `Flags`           | ✔️        | ✔️        | N/A           | `number`  | `UInt16`      | Set of bit-flags for this ledger entry. |

This spec proposes one additional field:

| Field Name | Constant? | Required? | Default Value | JSON Type | Internal Type | Description                                                                                                                                                                        |
| ---------- | --------- | --------- | ------------- | --------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Sponsor`  |           |           | N/A           | `string`  | `AccountID`   | The sponsor paying the owner reserve for a given ledger object. When present, it indicates that the reserve burden for that object has been shifted from the owner to the sponsor. |

### 4.2. Ownership

> Any sponsored object is still owned by the original owner, and the sponsor is not added as an additional owner.

Reviewer: How `account_sponsoring` will work then?

Author: That's why it's a Clio API and not in rippled - it would require a separate db.

Reviewer: may be  you should mention this in description

Author: b06ec4bd50518335e0e100a4329545d18f80e27f

| `Flags`          | ✔️        | `number`  | `UInt16`      | Flags on the sponsorship, indicating what type of sponsorship this is (fee vs. reserve).                                                                                                                                                           |
| `SigningPubKey`  |           | `string`  | `STBlob`      | The `SigningPubKey` for `SponsorAccount`, if single-signing.                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| `TxnSignature`   |           | `string`  | `STBlob`      | A signature of the transaction from the sponsor, to indicate their approval of this transaction, if single-signing. All signing fields must be included in the signature, including `Sponsor.SponsorAccount` and `Sponsor.Flags`.                  |

> | `Signers`        |           | `array`   | `STArray`     | An array of signatures of the transaction from the sponsor's signers to indicate their approval of this transaction, if the sponsor is multi-signing. All signing fields must be included, including `Sponsor.SponsorAccount` and `Sponsor.Flags`. |

Author: So is `sfSponsor` just an account now?

> | `Signers`        |           | `array`   | `STArray`     | An array of signatures of the transaction from the sponsor's signers to indicate their approval of this transaction, if the sponsor is multi-signing. All signing fields must be included, including `Sponsor.SponsorAccount` and `Sponsor.Flags`. |

Author: To clarify: we have `sfSponsor` as an account, and `sfSponsorSignature` as `sfSigningPubKey`+`sfTxnSignature`+`sfSigners`?

| `tfSponsorshipClearRequireSignForReserve` | `0x00080000` | Removes the restriction every use of this sponsor for sponsoring fees requires a signature from the sponsor.      |
| `tfDeleteObject`                          | `0x00100000` | Removes the ledger object.                                                                                        |

### 9.3. Failure Conditions

- `tx.Account` is not equal to either `tx.SponsorAccount` or `tx.Sponsee`
- Both `SponsorAccount` and `Sponsee` are specified
- `SponsorAccount` is specified (which means that the `Sponsee` is submitting the transaction) and `tfDeleteObject` is not enabled
- `MaxFee` is less than the base fee or is not denominated in XRP
- `FeeAmount` is less than the base fee or is not denominated in XRP
- If `tfDeleteObject` is enabled:
  - `FeeAmount` is specified
  - `MaxFee` is specified
  - `ReserveCount` is specified
  - `tfSponsorshipSetRequireSignForFee` is enabled
  - `tfSponsorshipSetRequireSignForReserve` is enabled

### 9.4. State Changes

- If the object already exists:
  - `Sponsorship.Amount = tx.FeeAmount`
  - `Sponsorship.MaxFee` = `tx.MaxFee`

>   - `Sponsorship.ReserveCount = tx.ReserveCount`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `Sponsorship.Amount += tx.FeeAmount`
  - `Sponsorship.MaxFee` = `tx.MaxFee`
  - `Sponsorship.ReserveCount += tx.ReserveCount`
```

##### 8.1.2.1. `SigningPubKey`, `TxnSignature` and `Signers`

Either `TxnSignature` or `Signers` must be included in the final transaction.

There will be no additional transaction fee required for the use of the `TxnSignature` field.

`TxnSignature` and `Signers` **will not** be signing fields (they will not be included in transaction signatures, though they will still be included in the stored transaction).

Either `SigningPubKey`+`TxnSignature` or `Signers` must be included in the transaction. There is one exception to this: if `lsfRequireSignatureForFee`/`lsfRequireSignatureForReserve` are not enabled for the type(s) of sponsorship in the transaction.

### 8.2. Transaction Fee

If the `SponsorSignature.Signers` field is necessary, then the total fee of the transaction will be increased, due to the extra signatures that need to be processed. This is similar to the additional fees for [multisigning](https://xrpl.org/docs/concepts/accounts/multi-signing/). The minimum fee will be $(|signatures|+1)*base\_fee$.

> The total fee calculation for signatures will now be $( 1+|tx.Signers| + |tx.SponsorSignature.Signers|) * base\_fee$ (plus transaction-specific fees).

Author: It renders properly in LaTeX. Otherwise the underscore indicates a subscript.

> The total fee calculation for signatures will now be $( 1+|tx.Signers| + |tx.SponsorSignature.Signers|) * base\_fee$ (plus transaction-specific fees).

Author: 11372cda5e800539baf384bc111f5c8de60ec952

Two accounts are allowed to submit a `SponsorshipTransfer` relationship to end the sponsor relationship for a sponsored ledger object: either the sponsor for that object or the owner of that object (the sponsee).

### 10.3. Migrating a Sponsorship to a New Account

A sponsorship can be migrated to a new account by including the `Sponsor` field with the `tfSponsorReserve` flag. This can be done for either a sponsored account or a sponsored ledger object.

Two accounts are allowed to submit a `SponsorshipTransfer` relationship to migrate the sponsor relationship: the sponsor or the sponsee.

The sponsor will likely only rarely want to do this (such as if they are transferring accounts), but the sponsee may want to migrate if they change providers.

### 10.4. Transaction Fee

**Fee Structure:** Standard

This transaction uses the standard transaction fee (currently 10 drops, subject to Fee Voting changes).

### 10.5. Failure Conditions

All failure conditions mentioned in [section 8.3](#83-failure-conditions) still apply here.

> Additional failure conditions specific to `SponsorshipTransfer`:

Author: * No flags implies `tfUniversalMask` - that becomes an implementation detail.
* `tfSponsorFee` should still be valid - I see no reason to disallow it, you can sponsor the fee if you want.

> Additional failure conditions specific to `SponsorshipTransfer`:

Author: @yinyiqian1 I think we discussed this offline and reworked who consents to what transfers. Let me know if this is still unclear/still a question.

- `tx.Account` is neither the current sponsor nor the owner (sponsee) of the object/account specified by `ObjectID` (`tecNO_PERMISSION`)
- If transferring the sponsorship to a new sponsor:
  - The new sponsor account does not exist (`terNO_ACCOUNT`)
  - The new sponsor does not have enough XRP to cover the reserve for this object/account (`tecINSUFFICIENT_RESERVE`)
  - The `Sponsor` field is malformed or missing required subfields (`temMALFORMED`)
- If dissolving the sponsorship (no `Sponsor` field or `tfSponsorReserve` flag not set):
  - The owner does not have enough XRP to cover the reserve for this object/account (`tecINSUFFICIENT_RESERVE`)

### 10.6. State Changes

- The `Sponsor` field on the object is deleted if the `tx.Sponsor.Account` is the object's `Owner`, otherwise the `Sponsor` field is updated to the new `tx.Sponsor.Account`.
- The old sponsor has its `SponsoringOwnerCount`/`SponsoringAccountCount` decremented by one.
- The new sponsor (if applicable) has its `SponsoringOwnerCount`/`SponsoringAccountCount` incremented by one.
- If there is no new sponsor, then the owner's `SponsoredOwnerCount` will be decremented by one.

> ## 11. Transaction: `Payment`

Author: I was thinking about this too. I lean towards 1 drop, because I'm worried about unintended consequences with allowing a 0-drop Payment.

This spec proposes the following additions:

| Flag Name                 | Flag Value   | Description                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------------------- | ------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `tfSponsorCreatedAccount` | `0x00080000` | This flag is only valid if the `Payment` is used to create an account. If it is enabled, the created account will be sponsored by the `tx.Account`. |

### 11.2. Failure Conditions

Existing failure conditions still apply (see [Payment documentation](https://xrpl.org/docs/references/protocol/transactions/types/payment)), with one exception:

- If `tfSponsorCreatedAccount` is enabled, the XRP amount does not need to be greater than or equal to the account reserve requirement.

Additional failure conditions when `tfSponsorCreatedAccount` is enabled:

- `tfNoRippleDirect`, `tfPartialPayment`, or `tfLimitQuality` are enabled (`temINVALID_FLAG`)
- `Amount` specifies a non-XRP currency (`temBAD_AMOUNT`)

> - `Destination` already exists (`tecNO_DST`)

Reviewer 2: It feels a bit off to use the `tecNO_DST` error code when the `Destination` actually exists.

One idea is to return `tecNO_SPONSOR_PERMISSION` instead, since the issue is that an existing account cannot be sponsored via `tfSponsorCreatedAccount`.

> - `Account` does not have enough XRP to cover the account reserve requirement (`tecINSUFFICIENT_RESERVE`)

Reviewer 2: It should be the same as the current tec code for Payment. (In terms of implementation, it will go through the existing code path.)

```suggestion
- `Account` does not have enough XRP to cover the account reserve requirement (`tecNO_DST_INSUF_XRP`)
```

- If `FeeAmount` is increased, deduct the additional XRP from the sponsor's balance
- If `FeeAmount` is decreased, return the difference to the sponsor's balance

If deleting the `Sponsorship` object (`tfDeleteObject` flag):

- Delete the `Sponsorship` ledger entry
- Return all remaining XRP in `FeeAmount` to the sponsor's balance
- Decrement the sponsor's `OwnerCount` by 1
- Remove the object from both the sponsor's and sponsee's owner directories
- Return the object reserve to the sponsor's available XRP

_Note: Deleting a `Sponsorship` object does not affect already-sponsored ledger entries or accounts. Those existing sponsored objects/accounts will retain their `Sponsor` field and continue to be sponsored. To dissolve sponsorship for existing objects, the `SponsorshipTransfer` transaction must be used._

### 9.6. Example JSON

```json
{
  "TransactionType": "SponsorshipSet",
  "Account": "rN7n7otQDd6FczFgLdlqtyMVrn3HMfXpf",
  "Sponsee": "rfkDkFai4jUfCvAJiZ5Vm7XvvWjYvDqeYo",
  "FeeAmount": "1000000",
  "MaxFee": "1000",
  "ReserveCount": 5,
  "Fee": "12",
  "Sequence": 42
}
```

## 10. Transaction: `SponsorshipTransfer`

> This transaction transfers a sponsor relationship for a particular ledger object's object reserve. The sponsor relationship can either be passed on to a new sponsor, or dissolved entirely (with the sponsee taking on the reserve). Either the sponsor or sponsee may submit this transaction at any point in time.

Reviewer: `object's object` -> object ?
Don't think you need so strict description here

### 10.1. Fields

| Field Name         | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type | Description                                                                                                                                                           |
| ------------------ | --------- | --------- | ------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `TransactionType`  | ✔️        | `string`  | `UInt16`      | The transaction type (`SponsorshipTransfer`).                                                                                                                         |
| `Account`          | ✔️        | `string`  | `AccountID`   | The account sending the transaction. This may be either the current sponsor or the current sponsee.                                                                   |
| `ObjectID`         |           | `string`  | `Hash256`     | The ID of the object to transfer sponsorship.                                                                                                                         |

> | `Sponsor`          |           | `string`  | `STAccount`   | The new sponsor of the object.                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: AccountID

Author: e70455e7c0600f05c8c2ee6793eb9222bbafb0ea

Two accounts are allowed to submit a `SponsorshipTransfer` relationship to migrate the sponsor relationship: the sponsor or the sponsee.

The sponsor will likely only rarely want to do this (such as if they are transferring accounts), but the sponsee may want to migrate if they change providers.

### 10.4. Transaction Fee

**Fee Structure:** Standard

This transaction uses the standard transaction fee (currently 10 drops, subject to Fee Voting changes).

### 10.5. Failure Conditions

All failure conditions mentioned in [section 8.3](#83-failure-conditions) still apply here.

Additional failure conditions specific to `SponsorshipTransfer`:

- `ObjectID` is specified but does not exist on the ledger (`tecNO_TARGET`)
- `ObjectID` is specified but does not have a `Sponsor` field (object is not sponsored) (`tecNO_PERMISSION`)
- `ObjectID` is not specified and the `tx.Account` does not have a `Sponsor` field (account is not sponsored) (`tecNO_PERMISSION`)
- `tx.Account` is neither the current sponsor nor the owner (sponsee) of the object/account specified by `ObjectID` (`tecNO_PERMISSION`)

> - If dissolving the sponsorship (no `Sponsor` field or `tfSponsorReserve` flag not set):

Author: Fixed in 10.1. e70455e7c0600f05c8c2ee6793eb9222bbafb0ea

The current design also supports having different sponsors for different objects, which allows users to use a broad set of services and platforms, instead of being locked into one.

<!--Stellar uses this philosophy ("the relationship should be ephemeral to prevent abuse") for their sponsored reserves design, which I like.-->

#### 20.3.2. Inner Object vs. Wrapper Transaction

An alternative design considered was a wrapper transaction (tentatively named `Relay`), similar to `Batch` in [XLS-56](../XLS-0056-batch/README.md), that the sponsor would sign. It would contain a sub-transaction from the sponsee.

It would look something like this:

| Field Name        | Required | JSON Type | Internal Type | Description                                                              |
| ----------------- | -------- | --------- | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `TransactionType` | Yes      | `string`  | `UInt16`      | The transaction type (`Relay`).                                          |

> | `Account`         | Yes      | `string`  | `STAccount`   | The sponsor of the transaction.                                          |

Reviewer: AccountID

Author: e70455e7c0600f05c8c2ee6793eb9222bbafb0ea
